Everybody should know that in the time of the Buddha there were bhikkhus and bhikkhunis, the female equivalent to the
four monks. And because it seemed to have died away, when Buddhism comes to the west and people do want fairness and
equality, why should we not have bhikkhunis? Ever since our particular tradition of theravada came to the West it's been a question which has been discussed. 

I've been to many conferences and we talked and talked and talked and talked over the issue. One of the important moments was in the conference in Hamburg gin 2007. It was sponsored by his Holiness the Dalai Lama. There some of the best research on the issue was presented. I couldn't go there myself but when I saw that research which was done there
seemed to be no legal obstacle in the vinaya (monastic code) to that ordination. It was only whether you had the will to do it. 

So over in Perth where I live many years ago we purchased about 600 acres of beautiful forest for women. It
was not just my goal but the whole communitys goal to have a nuns Monastery. And so it happened that we had
these very well-trained nuns who had been keeping the 10 precepts for so many years and then they asked for bhikkhuni
ordination. So it wasn't as if I initiated this you know sitting down in my room saying: "okay let's have bhikkhunis!"
This was a response to a long process which has been happening in the west and the fact that in Australia we have people who have been trained and ready to go.

Once we realized that it was possible and these bhikkhunis were ready to go there was no ethical reason, legal reason or any reason not to ordain them. So we had to make all the
arrangements which took a long time and of course in the strict vinaya we have I can't ordain a bhikkhuni. A bhikkhuni has to be ordained by another bikkhuni and there are bhikkhunis in our Tradition around. 

So we invited all these bhikkhunis from overseas with sister Tathaloka as a preceptor. They all came together in October 2009 and we did this wonderful ordination and all of the people in Perth and Australia were very
excited! We had actually done a bhikkhuni
ordination in our tradition according
to the vinaya and according to the the will
of the locals.

So at the time everybody was very very happy. It's only later on that some people found out and they got very embarrassed
about it and caused a lot of problems. And I can't really see what they were doing, creating problems when you're having a beautiful ceremony according to the vinaya, no faults there at
all, allowing somebody to get a higher ordination in Buddhism. It was very inspiring to see that.

My contribution is here is exaggerated. I was only part of the
process of many many people but just like in any Convoy, it's the car in front gets all the bugs on the windscreen because I was in front I got all the bugs smashing into my face.