One way or the other we're going to meet suffering in our livess, it's inevitable. And I think most of us
including me are here because we have experienced some form of suffering. 

It is quite a loaded word perhaps but suffering can include anything from being slightly disappointed with life or with yourself or with a friend, or situation in your life, to a downright suffering of illness and losing loved ones, divorce,
separation.

So all this suffering when things go wrong I'm sure we're all familiar with. But the Buddhist teaching has an extraordinarily positive message.

The Buddha says that he teaches only two things: suffering and the end of suffering. The important point there is the end. 

And yet he says that it's not possible to find the end without understanding what suffering really means. That means the nature of it, the scope, the breadth and also what to do with that suffering. 

We're not just destined to sit with it and grit our teeth or grin and bare it as they say in England, stiff upper lip.

There's actually meaning to it and something that can be done to help us deepen our compassion and our wisdom. 

And this is why it's such a wonderful message.

I borrowed the title of the day's talk from Venerable Tich Nhat Hanh, who was a very famous Vietnamese monk who spent his whole life serving others and teaching the message of peace. He used this beautiful phrase "no mud no Lotus" 

Which is really beautiful because it shows how the deeper we can put our roots down and feel into that suffering, the more we can use it as a kind of fertilizer for everything that's beautiful in the human heart. 

I think this is especially possible when we stop personalizing the suffering and start to see it as something universal.

A universal predicament that we share and that we
can actually help one another with.

So it's the core thread of the Buddha's teaching and also the purpose that people like myself go
forth. In the ordination chanting when we take ordination we ask our preceptor please give me the going forth to understand and become free from all suffering.

Kärsimys on myös keskeinen syys siihen, miksi kaltaiseni ihmiset ryhtyvät nunniksi tai munkeiksi. 

And in the Buddhist text it says time and again that all beings recoil from pain and desire their own
happiness. So it's a basic human preoccupation really: happiness with the ending of suffering.

Yet often we don't know how to define either happiness or suffering and we're looking for happiness quite often in the wrong place.

Ajahn Chah, who was my teacher's teacher, said its like when we have itch in our bum and we scratch our head. We're  looking in the wrong place for the happiness and we're looking to relieve the suffering in the wrong place as well. 

We're trying to fix things up outside and of course to some extent we have to try. We live in society there are problems that are collective that it's important be engaged as much as your capacity allows.

But also recognizing that we can only really attend to the cause of suffering within ourself. If we neglect that we
become quite inefficient in our work. 

We can't really
promote peace if we don't understand where peace comes from and how it arises inside.

We can't really try to alleviate other people's suffering if we don't really understand the causes for that
suffering.

When I first heard the Buddhist teachings and I heard somebody for the first time admitting and saying very directly that suffering is an inevitable part of life but also activating that wish for us to be free from suffering by saying that there is a path it was just an incredible relief.

Everyone around me had been saying what's wrong with you, why are you suffering? You've got nice friends, you're good at school, you're from a stable family and all the rest. 

But inside myself there was just this sense of not knowing why I was here not knowing the meaning of life and also the meaning of suffering and how to respond compassionately to that.

It was only really when I heard the Buddha's teachings that I felt like oh my goodness, now I understand that suffering can have a purpose and it can activate that wish to find a path.

The Buddha wasn't so sadistic as to say: "you're bound to
suffer for the rest of your life". 

He actually did the opposite. He said: "there is suffering, this is how to look at it, how to regard it and suffering is to be understood".

Whenever people is Buddhism a philosophy, is it a a way of life, is it a religion, I always say no, actually it's a path.

It's a path that shows us suffering, it shows us the cause and it shows us the way out. 

And if we walk on that path we can attain complete freedom from suffering. 