I was reminded of a little saying  which we printed some years ago on t-shirts. And that was "don't worry, everything's out of control". 

Usually people say "don't worry everything is under control". That is one of the biggest lies in the world! 

As a monk I have to tell the truth...

Everything is out of control and it's wonderful that it's out of control! In fact it's the most beautiful thing in the world the life is out of control!

It means how it evolves naturally rather than being created and caused by some powerful being whether that's your boss or  control freak husband or parent or whatever.

Life evolves and the less control we have the
greater happiness and the greater interest there is. 

Life becomes far more pleasant when we stop controlling and let go!

<h2>Controlling makes things worse</h2>

So why are there so many control freaks in the world? You probably know one, hope they're not sitting next to you...

It's a bad business model to have control freaks! You don't
get the best out of your staff if you're a control freak.

You've had control freaks trying to make you work harder, give you more work, just shout at you and make you afraid. Does that work?

Other type of boss is kind to you and caring and does nice things to you and you actually work harder for them you enjoy the work: more motivation, more energy, which means you get much higher quality work done! 

We have our family life, we have our weekend life but we also have the time we have in work. We spend a huge proportion of our life at our jobs and if that is not a high quality experience there's a lot of our life which just sucks.

It causes so much stress, so many problems, difficulties. 

What is it like if you've got whhat's called the boss from hell? Do you really do high quality work for them or just resent all the stuff they ask you to do?

That type of boss creates a lot of staff turnover. People leave, they go to another job. Stress levels go up, health goes down and your family life suffers as well.

Especially in the monk business it's all about relations, connecting with people, it's being kind, making people feel that they're welcomed. 

That is one of the strengths of our society. We've got such a vibrant Buddhist Society here in Western Australia. The reason is because we really want to to forge those social values as well so you feel welcome. 

This is what has made our "company", our Buddhist Society very popular and very successful.

And of course in a business you do need that friendship that warmth as well,  to your clients, to your suppliers, that counts for a huge amount of business success.

<h2>Fear causes controlling</h2>

The reason why people are control freaks is because they are afraid. 

Afraid of what might happen if they didn't take control, that company would go bankrupt if they didn't shout at their workers.

"They wouldn't produce the work if I didn't ensure that they were there on time in the morning, if I didn't put CCTV cameras in the office to check they were there, they'd probably be off somewhere else..."

What type of culture have we created now? Fear-based, control based and that's infected our family life, home life even
religious life.

One of the wonderful things which I discovered about Buddhism was that the Fear Factor wasn't there! You weren't supposed to be controlled.

It wasn't like if you don't go to the Busy Bee tomorrow you
will go to hell, you will burn! Which in this cold weather is actually quite attractive...

But we don't have that Fear Factor here because we're not trying to control you.

You don't have to be afraid. 

<h2>Kindness is the most important rule</h2>

Sometimes people ask me what's the etiquette when you come to the temple. Whatever you want to make it to be! And sometimes people say, hang on, I want to know what to do! I don't want to offend you!

People have been trying years to offend me they haven't succeeded yet...

Once there was someone doing meditation in our hall laid down,
pointed their feet at the Buddha, went to sleep and started snoring.

Now, if there's anything which is against the etiquette of this place, that's it. She was breaking so many rules of etiquette.

And it was so much that people sitting next to her woke her up saying, come on, point your feet in another direction! Sit up and if you're going to lay down at least don't snore and disturb other people!

When they did that I said that poor lady was a victim of very gross domestic abuse. Having enormous problems with her husband.

In those days we didn't have so many information and places you can go, people you could ring to solve those problems. And this poor lady hadn't slept for days and she came to this room here on a Friday night, and she felt for the first time in weeks safe.

And she just laid down and quite naturally went to sleep
and when I told people that then they understood what etiquette is: compassion, kindness. 

Not all these rules and regulations which are supposed to control you.

Compassion is supposed to be sensitive to the time and place and to the environment around you.
